ORIGINAL ARTICLE
An epigenetic mechanism links socioeconomic status to
changes in depression-related brain function in high-risk
adolescents
JR Swartz1, AR Hariri1,3 and DE Williamson2,3
Identifying biological mechanisms through which the experience of adversity emerges as individual risk for mental illness is an
important step toward developing strategies for personalized treatment and, ultimately, prevention. Preclinical studies have
identiﬁed epigenetic modiﬁcation of gene expression as one such mechanism. Recent clinical studies have suggested that
epigenetic modiﬁcation, particularly methylation of gene regulatory regions, also acts to shape human brain function associated
with risk for mental illness. However, it is not yet clear whether differential gene methylation as a function of adversity contributes
to the emergence of individual risk for mental illness. Using prospective longitudinal epigenetic, neuroimaging and behavioral data
from 132 adolescents, we demonstrate that changes in gene methylation associated with lower socioeconomic status (SES) predict
changes in risk-related brain function. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that lower SES during adolescence is associated with an increase in
methylation of the proximal promoter of the serotonin transporter gene, which predicts greater increases in threat-related
amygdala reactivity. We subsequently demonstrate that greater increases in amygdala reactivity moderate the association between
a positive family history for depression and the later manifestation of depressive symptoms. These initial results suggest a speciﬁc
biological mechanism through which adversity contributes to altered brain function, which in turn moderates the emergence of
general liability as individual risk for mental illness. If replicated, this prospective pathway may represent a novel target biomarker
for intervention and prevention among high-risk individuals.
Molecular Psychiatry advance online publication, 24 May 2016; doi:10.1038/mp.2016.82
INTRODUCTION
Although speciﬁc stressors including exposure to traumatic events
or the experience of childhood maltreatment and neglect have
been associated with increased risk for mental illness, 1 non-
speciﬁc, relatively common risk factors, such as low socioeconomic
status (SES), account for a large proportion of psychiatric
morbidity in the population.2 Low SES may confer risk through a
variety of mechanisms, including higher levels of perceived and
objective stress and cumulative environmental risk such as poor
housing quality, noise pollution and exposure to violence.3 Lower
SES has been associated with a host of negative outcomes
including poorer general health and increased risk for mental
illness including depression, anxiety and addiction.2,4,5 Given the
insidious nature of low SES, it is at best difﬁcult to directly mitigate
these associated risks. An alternative strategy is to identify speciﬁc
biological processes mediating the association between lower SES
and individual risk thereby creating possible targets through
which risk may be buffered.
One candidate biological process through which the environ-
ment may be exerting its in ﬂuence is epigenetics, which
encompasses molecular mechanisms mediating the effects of
extrinsic factors on intrinsic functions through the modulation of
gene expression.6 In particular, experience-dependent methyla-
tion of gene regulatory regions such as proximal promoter sites
has been proposed as one epigenetic mechanism through which
stress may drive risk for future mental illness.6 Generally, relatively
increased DNA methylation of gene promoters, which is most
often associated with decreased gene expression, has been
associated with exposure to both speciﬁc7 and non-speci ﬁc
stressors including lower SES.8 These epigenetic changes in gene
expression subsequently impact risk-related brain function and
behavior.9
Recent clinical studies have speci ﬁcally implicated DNA
methylation of the proximal promoter region of the serotonin
transporter gene (SLC6A4) as a potential epigenetic mechanism
of increased risk for mental illness. For example, the experience
of speciﬁc (that is, child abuse)10 and non-speciﬁc (that is, lower
SES)11 stressors is associated with increased methylation of
multiple CpG sites within SLC6A4, including the proximal pro-
moter, and these patterns of methylation have been associated
with higher depressive symptoms.12 Moreover, we have demon-
strated that relatively increased SLC6A4 proximal promoter
methylation is associated with increased threat-related amygdala
reactivity, which not only has a central role in stress responsive-
ness but also is implicated in the etiology and pathophysiology
of stress-related disorders including depression.13,14 Collectively,
these epigenetic ﬁndings are consistent with the important
modulatory role of the serotonin transporter on stress physiology,
amygdala function and mood.15
1Laboratory of NeuroGenetics, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA and2Division of Translational Neuroscience, Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. Correspondence: Dr JR Swartz, Laboratory of NeuroGenetics, Department of Ps ychology and
Neuroscience, Duke University, Campus Box 90086, 417 Chapel Drive, Durham, NC 27708, USA.
E-mail: Johnna.Swartz@duke.edu
3Both contributed equally as senior authors.
Received 21 September 2015; revised 16 March 2016; accepted 13 April 2016
Molecular Psychiatry (2016), 1–6
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 1359-4184/16
www.nature.com/mp
Despite these ﬁndings, cross-sectional data collected at one
point in time do not allow for examination of dynamic changes in
DNA methylation. Thus, it is unclear whether the experience of
stress is associated with achange in SLC6A4 methylation and, if so,
how this manifests as achange in risk-related brain function. Here,
we use longitudinal epigenetic, neuroimaging and behavioral data
to construct a prospective indirect effects model examining
whether lower SES predicts increased future risk for depression via
increasedSLC6A4 proximal promoter methylation and resulting
sensitization of threat-related amygdala reactivity. We test this
model in adolescents at high and low risk for depression due to
presence or absence of a family history of depression, respectively.
In prior analyses of this cohort, we have found that either a
positive family history of depression or exposure to stressful life
events predicts greater increases in the reactivity of the left
amygdala to fearful facial expressions from Wave 1 to Wave 2.16
Thus, we ﬁrst examined whether adversity-related changes in
SLC6A4 proximal promoter methylation may, in part, explain this
sensitization of amygdala reactivity. We modeled the effect of
three types of stressors previously associated with risk for
depression, including childhood maltreatment, stressful life
events, and low SES, on changes in methylation. We hypothesized
that exposure to these stressors would be associated with an
increase inSLC6A4 proximal promoter methylation from Wave 1 to
Wave 2, and that this increase would be associated with sensitized
amygdala reactivity to threat over the same time period.
Although a positive family history is one of the strongest
predictors of the future development of depression, not all
individuals with this risk factor will become depressed.17,18 Thus,
we next examined the extent to which greater increases in threat-
related amygdala reactivity associated with differentialSLC6A4
methylation predicted individual risk for depression in adolescents
and whether this risk was speciﬁc for youth with a positive family
history of depression. Prior studies have found that threat-related
amygdala reactivity predicts greater psychological vulnerability
to future trauma,19,20 and we recently demonstrated in a large
sample of young adults that a baseline measure of threat-related
amygdala reactivity predicts the likelihood of experiencing anxiety
and depression symptoms following subsequent exposure to
stressful life events several years later.14 Accordingly, we
hypothesized that increases in amygdala reactivity from Wave
1 to Wave 2 would predict greater increases in depressive
symptoms from Wave 2 to Wave 3, approximately 1 year later.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Participants
In line with our prior work, 13 analyses focused on the subset of 183
Caucasian, non-Hispanic participants from the Teen Alcohol Outcomes
Study16 in order to avoid potential population strati ﬁcation due to
differences in ancestry (see Supplementary Table 1 for full sample
demographics). We used genetic ancestry 21 to conﬁrm self-report of
race/ethnicity (see Supplementary Methods).
Participants were 11–15 years old at Wave 1, 13–18 years old at Wave
2 and 14–19 years old at Wave 3. After complete description of the study
to the participants, parents provided written informed consent and
participants provided assent following procedures approved by the
Institutional Review Board at the University of Texas Health Sciences
Center San Antonio. Twenty participants (19 positive for a family history of
depression (FH+) and 1 negative for a family history (FH− )) had an anxiety
disorder diagnosis at study entry or developed an anxiety disorder
between Waves 1 and 2. Anxiety diagnosis (dummy-coded) was included
as a covariate in analyses run in the full sample, but removed as a covariate
in multi-group analyses given the single diagnosis in the FH − group.
Seven FH+ participants developed a diagnosis of major depression
between Waves 1 and 2 and two FH+ participants developed a diagnosis
between Waves 2 and 3. We did not include depression diagnosis as
a covariate since depressive symptoms at Wave 2 were included as a
covariate in all analyses. There were 21 pairs of siblings included in this
sample. Recruitment procedures, attrition and exclusion of participants for
functional magnetic resonance imaging quality control at Waves 1 and 2
have been reported previously. 16 We also examined characteristics of
attrition from Wave 1 to 3. Fewer FH+ participants (n= 33) completed the
Wave 3 follow-up compared with FH− participants (n= 46), χ2(1) = 5.12,
P = 0.024. There were no differences in attrition based on gender, age, CTQ
emotional neglect scores, stressful life events, SES or depressive symptoms
assessed at Wave 1.
Environmental risk factors
Consistent with our prior research,22 emotional neglect was assessed at
Wave 1 with the emotional neglect subscale of the Childhood Trauma
Questionnaire.23 To assess SES at Wave 1, parents reported education
levels and income for themselves and their spouses (if married). Consistent
with prior research, 24 a composite SES indicator was calculated by
averaging the standardized values of these variables (Supplementary
Table 2). Stressful life events occurring the year before theﬁrst functional
magnetic resonance imaging scan were assessed at Wave 1 with the
Stressful Life Events Schedule. 25 As reported in our prior research, 16
objective threat ratings for each life event were squared, summed and
averaged to obtain a mean level of objectively-rated stressful life events
occurring the year before theﬁrst wave.
SLC6A4 methylation
Details regarding acquisition and analysis of SLC6A4 methylation have
been reported previously for theﬁrst wave of the study.13 Procedures were
identical for obtaining methylation levels at the second wave of the study. In
line with prior research,13 data from the 20 CpG sites proximal to the
transcription start site ofSLC6A4 measured at Wave 1 and Wave 2 were
entered into a principal components analysis. Consistent with our prior
research conducted with Wave 1 data,13 the principal components analysis
including Wave 1 and Wave 2 data resulted in ﬁve components with
eigenvalues greater than 1, and scores for theﬁrst component (representing
24.1% of the total variance) were extracted for each individual
(Supplementary Table 3). Similar to our prior work in this sample, 16
residualized change scores were calculated as a measure of changes greater
or less than expected at Wave 2 based on Wave 1 values. Methylation data
were available for 178 participants at Wave 1 and 136 participants at Wave 2;
residualized change scores (that is, for those participants that provided valid
data at both Wave 1 and Wave 2) were available in 132 participants.
Amygdala reactivity
Details regarding acquisition, pre-processing and analysis of functional
magnetic resonance imaging data have been reported previously.16 All
analyses were conducted with mean parameter estimates extracted from
functional clusters signiﬁcant atPo0.05 family-wise error corrected within
amygdala regions of interest. We focused analyses on values extracted
from the left amygdala for the contrast of Fearful Faces4Shapes, based on
our prior ﬁnding that left amygdala reactivity to fearful faces increased
from Wave 1 to Wave 2 in adolescents at higher risk for depression.16 To
examine speciﬁcity of effects to the basolateral or centromedial amygdala,
we also extracted values for the contrast of Fearful Faces4Shapes using
probabilistic regions of interest based on cytoarchitectonic mapping26 and
corrected for multiple comparisons by applying a Bonferroni-corrected
threshold ofPo0.025. Similar to the procedure withSLC6A4 methylation,
we calculated a residualized change score. Imaging data were available for
139 participants at Wave 1 and 107 participants at Wave 2; change scores
were available in 87 participants.
Depressive symptoms
Adolescents completed the Youth Self Report27 at each wave of the study.
To assess depressive symptoms, we used Affective Problems scores from
the DSM-oriented scales,28 which have been shown to correspond to DSM-
IV major depressive disorder symptoms.29 Residualized change scores were
calculated to assess the changes in symptoms from Wave 2 to 3. Symptom
scores were available in 136 participants at Wave 2 and 79 participants at
Wave 3; residualized change scores were available in 79 participants.
Covariates
We included the following as covariates on all paths of the model: age at
Wave 1, time (in years) between waves, gender (dummy-coded: 0 = Male,
1 = Female), anxiety diagnosis (except in multi-group models) and the risk
Epigenetic changes link risk and brain function
JR Swartz et al
2
Molecular Psychiatry (2016), 1– 6 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
factors (CTQ emotional neglect, SES and stressful life events at Wave 1).
Note that the risk factors were predictors of interest in theﬁrst path and
that they were then carried forward as covariates on all other paths of the
model. Family history (dummy-coded: 0 = negative family history, 1 = posi-
tive family history) was also included as a covariate in analyses conducted
in the full sample; this was removed as a covariate when conducting multi-
group analyses to test for moderation by family history. As described in
detail elsewhere,13 a subset of participants (n= 103) were genotyped for
the serotonin transporter-linked polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) and
rs25531. Genotype (dummy-coded: 0 = LALA;1 = LA/S, LA/LG, S/S, LG/LG,
S/LG) was included as a covariate on all paths. Genotype distribution did
not deviate from Hardy –Weinberg equilibrium for the 5-HTTLPR,
χ2(1) = 0.001,P = 0.97, or rs25531,χ2(1) = 0.44,P = 0.51, genotypes. Finally,
to ensure that changes in methylation and amygdala reactivity between
Wave 1 and Wave 2 emerged before the onset of depressive symptoms,
we also included YSR Affective Problems scores at Wave 2 as a covariate in
all analyses. The one exception was in the ﬁnal path (predicting
residualized change in Affective Problems scores from Wave 2 to 3)
because YSR Affective Symptoms at Wave 2 are implicitly controlled for
using residualized change as an outcome. We also examined gender as a
moderator of all paths of the analysis (reported in Supplementary
Information).
Statistical analyses
All statistical analyses were conducted using MPlus v7 software (Muthén &
Muthén, Los Angeles, CA, USA) with full information maximum likelihood
estimation, which provides unbiased estimates in the presence of missing
data. Each path wasﬁrst estimated in the full sample including all
covariates described above. All predictors were mean centered to aid in
interpretation of the results, and the variance and covariance of all
predictors was modeled. Next, multi-group analyses were conducted to
test for moderation by family history. Moderation was assessed usingχ2
difference tests; if constraining parameter estimates to be equal between
groups leads to a signiﬁcant decrease in modelﬁt, then one can conclude
that the effect is signiﬁcantly moderated by family history. Additional tests
to examine the robustness of these effects are reported in the
Supplementary Information.
After testing each path individually, we then constructed an indirect
effects model to test the indirect effect of environmental risk factors on
changes in depressive symptoms, mediated by changes inSLC6A4
methylation and amygdala reactivity to fear. On the basis of results from
testing paths individually, we constrained the paths from environmental
risk to SLC6A4 methylation and from SLC6A4 methylation to amygdala
reactivity to be equal across family history groups, but allowed theﬁnal
path (change in amygdala reactivity to change in symptoms) to be free
across the positive family history and negative family history groups given
evidence for moderation. We also freed each parameter in the model
individually and tested whether allowing parameter estimates for any of
the covariates or variances to vary by family history improved theﬁt of the
model. None of the covariates were signiﬁcantly moderated by family
history; therefore, all parameters except that path were constrained to be
equal in the model. The 5-HTTLPR genotype covariate was removed from
this model due to poor modelﬁt; removing this covariate from each path
resulted in a signiﬁcant improvement in modelﬁt, Δχ2(4) = 50.22,Po0.001.
To provide a measure of general effect size for the indirect effect, we
report the product of coefﬁcients αβ statistic. We also provide boot-
strapped conﬁdence intervals, which use a Monte Carlo simulation (1000
draws), which do not assume normality of the distribution of indirect
effects to assess signiﬁcance.
RESULTS
Lower SES at Wave 1 predicts greater increases in SLC6A4
proximal promoter methylation at Wave 2
We ﬁrst tested whether stressors previously associated with risk
for depression predicted changes in SLC6A4 methylation. Con-
sistent with our hypothesis, lower SES measured at Wave 1
prospectively predicted greater increases in SLC6A4 proximal
promoter methylation 2 years later at Wave 2,B = − 0.33, s.e. = 0.1,
Beta =− 0.24, P = 0.02, Δr2 = 0.05 (Figure 1). In fact, SES was the
only measure of environmental stress that predicted changes in
SLC6A4 proximal promoter methylation (Supplementary Table 4).
Although SES signiﬁcantly varied as a function of familial risk in
the expected direction (that is, lower in those with a positive
family history), the effect of SES onSLC6A4 methylation was not
moderated by family history for depression, Δχ2(1)o0.001,
P40.99. In other words, lower SES predicted an increase
in SLC6A4 proximal promoter methylation over time to the same
degree in adolescents with or without a positive family history of
mental illness.
Increases in SLC6A4 proximal promoter methylation from Wave 1
to Wave 2 predict greater increases in threat-related amygdala
reactivity over the same time period
Having identiﬁed that lower SES is associated with an increase in
SLC6A4 proximal promoter methylation over time, we next asked
whether this change in methylation was associated with the
change in left amygdala reactivity to fearful facial expressions
previously noted in this cohort.16 We found that greater increases
in SLC6A4 proximal promoter methylation from Wave 1 to Wave 2
were associated with greater increases in reactivity during the
same time window, B = 0.09, s.e. = 0.04, Beta = 0.21,P = 0.04,
Δr2 = 0.05. Subsequent analysis by amygdala subregion revealed
that this effect was driven by increases in centromedial but not
basolateral amygdala reactivity, B = 0.10, s.e. = 0.04, Beta = 0.26,
P = 0.01,Δr2 = 0.08 (Figure 2; Supplementary Table 5). As observed
for SES effects on methylation, the association betweenSLC6A4
methylation and reactivity was not moderated by familial risk,
Δχ2(1) = 1.02,P = 0.31. Thus, increases inSLC6A4 proximal promo-
ter methylation predict increases in threat-related centromedial
amygdala reactivity independently of family history of depression.
Increases in threat-related amygdala reactivity from Wave 1 to
Wave 2 predict future increases in depressive symptoms from
Wave 2 to Wave 3 one year later
Analyses revealed a signiﬁcant moderating effect of familial risk on
the association between increases in amygdala reactivity and
future depressive symptoms,Δχ2(1) = 5.92,P = 0.01. In adolescents
with a positive family history, greater increases in reactivity from
Wave 1 to Wave 2 prospectively predicted greater increases in
Figure 1. Lower socioeconomic status (SES) at Wave 1 predicts
greater increases in SLC6A4 methylation from Wave 1 to 2.
Standardized household SES was calculated by obtaining the mean
of standardized scores of parents’ education and income levels, as
well as spouses’ education and income levels if reporting parent was
married. Lower SES at Wave 1 was associated with greater increases
in methylation at Wave 2, B = /C00.33, s.e. =0.1, Beta = /C00.24,
P =0.02, Δr2 =0.05. Shaded area represents 95% con ﬁdence
intervals.
Epigenetic changes link risk and brain function
JR Swartz et al
3
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Molecular Psychiatry (2016), 1– 6
depressive symptoms from Wave 2 to Wave 3,B = 2.71, s.e. = 1.1,
Beta = 0.46,P = 0.02,Δr2 = 0.21 (Figure 3; Supplementary Table 6).
There was no such relationship in adolescents without a family
history of depression,B = − 0.95, s.e. = 1.3, Beta =− 0.17, P = 0.47,
Δr2 = 0.02.
Lower SES in adolescence has an indirect effect on future
changes in depressive symptoms via increased methylation and
threat-related amygdala reactivity
The above analyses separately established effects between lower
SES and increases in SLC6A4 proximal promoter methylation,
increases in methylation and increases in amygdala reactivity, and
increases in reactivity and future depressive symptoms. Finally, we
constructed an indirect effects model to simultaneously examine
the indirect effect of lower SES measured at Wave 1 on changes in
depressive symptoms from Wave 2 to Wave 3, via changes in
SLC6A4methylation and threat-related amygdala reactivity. The
path from amygdala reactivity to changes in symptoms was freed
to vary between the family history groups given theﬁnding of
signiﬁcant moderation. All other paths were constrained to be
equal across groups. The indirect effect was estimated by
generating bias-corrected 95% con ﬁdence intervals with 1000
bootstrapped samples; conﬁdence intervals that do not include 0
indicate a signiﬁcant indirect effect. Theﬁnal model had a goodﬁt,
Δχ2(38) = 28.87,P = 0.86, root mean square error of approxima-
tion = 0.00, comparativeﬁt index = 1.00, standardized root mean
square residual = 0.07. As expected, SES had an indirect effect on
changes in depressive symptoms in the positive family history
group only, αβ = − 0.06, s.e. = 0.05, 95% conﬁdence intervals
[ − 0.21, − 0.002] (Figure 4). This negative indirect effect indicates
that lower SES predicts greater than expected increases inSLC6A4
methylation and centromedial amygdala reactivity, which in turn
predicts greater than expected increases in future depressive
symptoms. In contrast, this indirect effect was not signiﬁcant for
the negative family history group, αβ = 0.03, s.e. = 0.05, 95%
conﬁdence intervals [− 0.02, 0.17].
DISCUSSION
Our results provide initial evidence for a prospective biological
pathway through which a common stressor, namely lower SES,
may increase risk for future depression in high-risk adolescents.
Speciﬁcally, lower SES predicted residualized change in SLC6A4
proximal promoter methylation, which in turn predicted residua-
lized change in threat-related reactivity of the centromedial
amygdala, which drives a number of autonomic responses to
stress including activation of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal
axis. These ﬁndings extend our earlier observation identifying a
cross-sectional relationship between methylation and amygdala
reactivity in two separate cohorts,13 and suggest that relative
methylation status of the SLC6A4 proximal promoter region is a
reliable predictor of amygdala reactivity across time. Because SES
was on average lower among adolescents with a positive family
history of depression, and this pathway is uniquely associated with
the emergence of depressive symptoms in these adolescents, this
may partially explain our priorﬁnding that these same adolescents
show greater increases in amygdala reactivity over time.16
Our results further demonstrate that an increase in risk-related
brain function prospectively predicts an increase in depression
symptoms approximately 1 year later particularly among high-risk
adolescents. Notably, we found that sensitized amygdala reactivity
only predicted increases in depressive symptoms among adoles-
cents with a positive family history of depression. It is possible that
these high-risk adolescents experience additional forms of chronic
Figure 2. Greater increases in SLC6A4 methylation are associated
with greater increases in centromedial amygdala reactivity to fearful
facial expressions from Wave 1 to Wave 2. Mean parameter
estimates were extracted from functional clusters activated at both
Waves 1 and 2 within the whole left amygdala (a), the left
centromedial amygdala (b) and the left basolateral amygdala (c)
for the contrast of Fearful Faces 4Shapes. Greater increases in
SLC6A4 methylation were associated with greater increases in
centromedial amygdala reactivity, B =0.10, s.e. =0.04, Beta = 0.26,
P =0.01, Δr2 =0.08.
Figure 3. Greater increases in centromedial amygdala reactivity to
fearful faces from Wave 1 to Wave 2 predict greater increases in
depressive symptoms from Wave 2 to Wave 3 in adolescents with a
positive family history of depression. Residualized change scores
were calculated with symptoms from the Youth Self Report (YSR)
Affective Problems scale at Waves 2 and 3. Greater increases in
centromedial amygdala reactivity predicted greater increases in
symptoms 1 year later in the positive family history group,B =2.71,
s.e. =1.1, Beta=0.46, P =0.02, Δr2 =0.21.
Epigenetic changes link risk and brain function
JR Swartz et al
4
Molecular Psychiatry (2016), 1– 6 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
adversity such as parental neglect or familial discord uncommon
among their low-risk counterparts, and that this additional
exposure is necessary to trigger symptoms of depression. This is
consistent with our ﬁnding in an independent sample of young
adults that increased amygdala reactivity to threat only predicts
future internalizing symptoms in response to higher levels
of stress.14
As our follow-up measure of depressive symptoms was limited
to self-report, however, it is unclear whether this pathway predicts
clinically signiﬁcant levels of dysfunction. Of course, we did not
have access to brain-derived DNA and were limited to assays of
SLC6A4methylation in DNA derived from peripheral tissues. But,
there is evidence that methylation ofSLC6A4 may be conserved
across DNA derived from multiple tissue types including blood,
saliva and brain.13 These limitations notwithstanding our results
identify a speci ﬁc biological pathway through which broader
environmental adversity may act to drive individual vulnerability
for depression among at-risk adolescents.
In addition to increased chronic stress experienced by parents
and their offspring, lower SES is further associated with a range of
environmental risk factors that may bias developmental changes
in DNA methylation, including poor nutrition and smoking.30,31
Identifying speciﬁc environmental mechanisms contributing to
the effects of SES on methylation observed here will help narrow
targets for possible intervention. Moreover, preventive interven-
tions such as training in mindfulness-based techniques may be
effective in lowering threat-related amygdala reactivity in
adolescents identiﬁed as high risk due to increased SLC6A4
methylation.32 Isolation of family process factors (for example,
high family con ﬂict) that help explain why higher amygdala
reactivity predicts depressive symptoms only in adolescents with a
positive family history of depression will help further focus on
targets for prevention within a family context. Thus, if replicated,
the risk pathway identiﬁed here could represent a discrete
biomarker that could be targeted by novel strategies for
personalized treatment and prevention.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
grant R01AA016274 and the Dielmann Family (DEW), MH087493 (Consuelo Walss-
Bass, PhD), the National Institute on Drug Abuse grant R01DA033369 and
R01DA031579 (ARH), the National Institute on Aging grant R01AG049789 (ARH)
and the Center for the Study of Adolescent Risk and Resilience, NIH grant
P30DA023026 (JRS). We thank Ryan Bogdan, Annchen Knodt and Caitlin Carey for
assistance with conducting analyses and Yuliya Nikolova for discussions of the
manuscript.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
ARH and DEW designed the study; DEW oversaw analysis of DNA methylation;
ARH and JRS oversaw analysis of functional imaging data; JRS conducted the
statistical analyses and drafted the manuscript; all authors edited and approved
the ﬁnal manuscript.
REFERENCES
1 Chapman DP, Whitﬁeld CL, Felitti VJ, Dube SR, Edwards VJ, Anda RF. Adverse
childhood experiences and the risk of depressive disorders in adulthood.J Affect
Disord 2004; 82: 217–225.
2 Goodman E, Slap GB, Huang B. The public health impact of socioeconomic status
on adolescent depresssion and obesity.Am J Public Health2003; 93: 1844–1850.
3 Cohen S, Janicki-Deverts D, Chen E, Matthews KA. Childhood socioeconomic
status and adult health.Ann NY Acad Sci2010; 1186:3 7–55.
4 Fryers T, Melzer D, Jenkins R. Social inequalities and the common mental dis-
orders: a systematic review of the evidence. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol
2003; 38:2 2 9–237.
5 Barbeau EM, Krieger N, Soobader M. Working class matters: Socioeconomic dis-
advantage, race/ethnicity, gender, and smoking in NHIS 2000.Am J Public Health
2010; 94:2 6 9–278.
6 Bagot RC, Meaney MJ. Epigenetics and the biological basis of gene x environment
interactions. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry2010; 49: 752–771.
7 McGowan PO, Sasaki A, D'Alessio AC, Dymov S, Labonte B, Szyf Met al.Epigenetic
regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human brain associates with
childhood abuse. Nat Neurosci 2009; 12:3 4 2–348.
8 Beach SR, Brody GH, Lei MK, Kim S, Cui J, Philibert RA. Is serotonin transpoter
genotype associated with epigenetic susceptibility or vulnerability? Examination
of the impact of socioeconomic status risk on African American youth.Dev Psy-
chopathol 2014; 26:2 8 9–304.
9 Nikolova YS, Hariri AR. Can we observe epigenetic effects on human brain
function? Trends Cogn Sci2015; 19:3 6 6–373.
10 Beach SR, Brody GH, Todorov AA, Gunter TD, Philibert RA. Methylation at
SLC6A4 is linked to family history of child abuse: An examination of the
Iowa Adoptee sample. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 2010; 153B:
710–713.
11 Beach SRH, Dogan MV, Brody GH, Philibert RA. Differential impact of cumulative
SES risk on methylation of protein-protein interaction pathways as a function of
SLC6A4 genetic variation in African American young adults.Biol Psychol2014; 96:
28–34.
Figure 4. Indirect effects model examining the indirect effect of SES on future changes in depressive symptoms, via changes inSLC6A4
methylation and centromedial amygdala reactivity to fear. Not shown inﬁgure: covariates included on each path were age, gender, emotional
neglect, stressful life events, SES, time between waves and depressive symptoms at Wave 2 (except on theﬁnal path). 95% conﬁdence
intervals for the indirect effect were obtained by requesting 1000 bootstrapped samples using Mplus v7. FH+=positive family history;
FH − =negative family history; SES=socioeconomic status assessed at Wave 1.
Epigenetic changes link risk and brain function
JR Swartz et al
5
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Molecular Psychiatry (2016), 1– 6
12 Zhao J, Goldberg J, Bremner JD, Vaccarino V. Association between promoter
methylation of serotonin transpoter gene and depressive symptoms: a mono-
zygotic twin study.Psychosom Med 2013; 75: 523–529.
13 Nikolova YS, Koenen KC, Galea S, Wang C, Seney ML, Sibille E et al. Beyond
genotype: Serotonin transporter epigenetic modiﬁcation predicts human brain
function. Nat Neurosci 2014; 17: 1153–1155.
14 Swartz JR, Knodt AR, Radtke SR, Hariri AR. A neural biomarker of psychological
vulnerability to future life stress.Neuron 2015; 85:5 0 5–511.
15 Hariri AR, Holmes A. Genetics of emotional regulation: The role of the serotonin
transporter in neural function.Trends Cogn Sci2006; 10:1 8 2–191.
16 Swartz JR, Williamson DE, Hariri AR. Developmental change in amygdala reactivity
during adolescence: effects of family history of depression and stressful
life events.Am J Psychiatry2015; 172: 276–283.
17 Williamson DE, Birmaher B, Axelson D, Ryan ND, Dahl RE. First episode of
depression in children at low and high familial risk for depression.J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 2004; 43:2 9 1–297.
18 Weissman MM, Wickramaratne P, Nomura Y, Warner V, Pilowsky D, Verdeli H.
Offspring of depressed parents: 20 years later. Am J Psychiatry 2006; 163:
1001–1008.
19 Admon R, Lubin G, Stern O, Rosenberg K, Sela L, Ben-Ami Het al. Human vul-
nerability to stress depends on amygdala's predisposition and hippocampal
plasticity.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA2009; 106: 14120–14125.
20 McLaughlin KA, Busso DS, Duys A, Green JG, Alves S, Way Met al. Amygdala
response to negative stimuli predicts PTSD symptom onset following
a terrorist attack.Depress Anxiety 2014; 31:8 3 4–842.
21 Price AL, Patterson NJ, Plenge RM, Weinblatt ME, Shadick NA, Reich D. Principal
component analysis corrects for stratiﬁcation in genome-wide association studies.
Nat Genet 2006; 38: 904–909.
22 Hanson JL, Hariri AR, Williamson DE. Blunted ventral striatum development in
adolescence reﬂects emotional neglect and predicts depressive symptoms.Biol
Psychiatry 2015; 78:5 9 8–605.
23 Bernstein DP, Stein JA, Newcomb MD, Walker E, Pogge D, Ahluvalia T et al.
Development and validation of a brief screening version of the Childhood Trauma
Questionnaire.Child Abuse Negl2003; 27: 169–190.
24 Gianaros PJ, Horenstein JA, Cohen S, Matthews KA, Brown SM, Flory JDet al.
Perigenual anterior cingulate morphology covaries with perceived social stand-
ing. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci2007; 2: 161–173.
25 Williamson DE, Birmaher B, Ryan ND, Shiffrin TP, Lusky JA, Protopapa Jet al. The
stressful life events schedule for children and adolescents: development and
validation.Psychiatry Res 2003; 119:2 2 5–241.
26 Amunts K, Kedo O, Kindler M, Pieperhoff P, Mohlberg H, Shah N et al.
Cytoarchitectonic mapping of the human amygdala, hippocampal region and
entorhinal cortex: intersubject variability and probability maps.Anat Embryol (Berl)
2005; 210:3 4 3–352.
27 Achenbach TM.Manual for the Youth Self-Report and 1991 Proﬁles. Department of
Psychiatry, University of Vermont: Burlington, VT, 1991.
28 Achenbach TM, Dumenci L, Rescorla LA. DSM-oriented and empirically based
approaches to constructing scales from the same item pools.J Clin Child Adolesc
Psychol 2003; 32:3 2 8–340.
29 Ferdinand RF. Validity of the CBCL/YSR DSM-IV scales anxiety problems and
affective problems. J Anxiety Disord2008; 22:1 2 6–134.
30 Toledo-Rodriguez M, Lotﬁpour S, Leonard G, Perron M, Richer L, Veillette Set al.
Maternal smoking during pregnancy is associated with epigenetic modiﬁcations
of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor-6 exon in adolsecent offspring.Am J Med
Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet2010; 153:1 3 5 0–1354.
31 Burdge GC, Lillycrop KA, Phillips ES, Slater-Jefferies JL, Jackson AA, Hanson MA.
Folic acid supplementation during the juvenile-pubertal period in rats modiﬁes
the phenotype and epigenotype induced by prenatal nutrition.J Nutr 2009; 139:
1054–1060.
32 Lutz J, Herwig U, Opialla S, HIttmeyer A, Jancke L, Rufer Met al. Mindfulness
and emotion regulation--an fMRI study. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2013; 9:
776–785.
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Molecular Psychiatry website (http://www.nature.com/mp)
Epigenetic changes link risk and brain function
JR Swartz et al
6
Molecular Psychiatry (2016), 1– 6 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
